COFFEE & CAFE 

SERVICE &TRAINING 
MANUAL 

LAST EDITED JANUARY 30,2019 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. INTRODUCTION 
2. THE BASICS 
3. DRESS CODE 
4. GREAT SERVICE 
5. FOOD SAFETY 
6. SERVINGALCOHOL 
7. SCHEDULING 
8. ADDITIONAL POLICIES 
9. HISTORY OFTHEBUSINESS&PROPERTY 
10. EMPLOYEE DISCOUNT 

INTRODUCTION 

Welcome to Smith Coffee & Cafe.Over the past decade in the coffee and service industry we 
have learned that working together to provide great service to our guests does not happen by accident. 
This manual will provide a basic introduction to some of our best practices for providing each guest a 
great experience in a comfortable and sustainable way. 

As a Smith employee we are promising to you to treat you each and every day with kindness and 
respect in a professional manner. 

As a Smith employee we are asking that you work for us as an adult and as a professional. 
Specifcally,this means coming to work mentally and physically able,on time in the appropriate dress 
code. We also ask that you communicate in a professional manner. 

Our promise to our guests is to happily serve them great food and great coffee in a great 
environment. 

We have little doubt that we are expecting a lot of all of our employees. However by holding a 
high standard we feel this is most respectful of everybody's time and well being. By having a high 
standard up front,we feel we can work much more easily together in the long run. 

Running and working at a coffee shop is fairly simple but it is not easy.This manual is by no means 
a complete or thorough explanation of what to do or what not to do in each and every circumstance 
you will run into in your day to day work. You will continue to need to use your judgement and intuition 
daily in this job. That said,most of the time there is an issue it will come back to one of the topics 
covered in this manual which is why this manual has come to exist in the frst place.The following topics 
cover the recurring issues and diffculties in working in a high energy job with lots of human interaction 
and team work. A common misconception about this industry is that cafe work is somehow low key or 
trivial. Almost anyone with experience in the industry will quickly clarify that this is not the case. Most 
coffee shops do not stay in business for over a decade,and we want to last many decades.For us to 
succeed we must work together and work smart. 


THE BASICS OF RUNNINGA COFFEE SHOP 
FROMTHE BOOK,WHAT I KNOWABOUT RUNNING COFFEE SHOPS 
BY COLIN HARMON 
EDITEDANDAMENDED FOR SMITH 

• 
SWEEPTHE STREET OUTSIDE. 
• 
KEEPTHEWINDOWS CLEAN. 
• 
CHECKTHETOILETSALLTHETIME. 
• 
AT LEAST ONE PERSON BEHINDTHE COUNTER FACING CUSTOMERSWITH EYE 
CONTACT 100% OFTHETIME 
• 
SAY 'HELLO'. 
• 
SAY 'GOODBYE'. 
• 
CLEARTHETABLESAS FASTASYOU CAN. 
• 
KEEPA COMFORTABLETEMPERATURE. 
• 
PLAY APPROPRIATE MUSIC,NOT JUST 'GOOD' MUSIC. 
• 
ALWAYS HAVE MUSIC PLAYING,ALWAYS. 
• 
CLEANYOUR COFFEE MACHINE. 
• 
DRESS NEATLY. 
• 
FINISHYOUR CONVERSATIONS STRAIGHTAWAY WHENA CUSTOMERAPPEARS. 
• 
KEEPTHE SHELVES STOCKED. 
• 
DEEP CLEANTHE CAFE ONCEA MONTH. 
• 
USEWARM CUPS,NOT HOT,NOT COLD. 
• 
DON'T SERVE CUPSWITH SPILLS DOWNTHE SIDE. 
• 
SET DRINKS UPTHE SAMEWAY ALLTHETIME. 
• 
MAKE SUREALLTHE LIGHTBULBSWORK. 
• 
REPAINTTHE ROOM OFTEN. 
• 
DRY TABLESAFTERYOUWIPETHEM. 
• 
TAKE CARE OFYOUR ESPRESSO MACHINE. 
• 
SAY HELLOTOYOUR CO-WORKERS. 
• 
IFYOUTHINK SOMEONE'S NOT HAPPY ASK. 
• 
SMILE. 

DRESS CODE 
Dress professionally for the job. 

APRONS 

We require an apron to be worn for each position.We will supply you with one and we will have 
some available at the store as well.Please wear the apron fully up and not tied ½ way.Please wash you r 
apron before it gets dirty. 

PERMITTED 
Tops:Collared shirt,plain sweater,plain t-shirt 
Bottoms:Jeans,pants,skirt 
Shoes:Must be closed toed and non slip 

Please wear clothes that are professional and that you can move around in. 

NOT PERMITTED 

– 
No hooded sweat shirts or jackets 
– 
No pajama or exercise clothes or clothes with holes in it. 
– 
No hats 
– 
No logos for other brands or other businesses 
– 
No loose ftting or draped clothes that could make it hard to work of contaminate food or 
drinks 
– 
Do not wear anything that can get in the way of doing you work. 

GREAT SERVICE 

We all want to work at a place that does great work. While it can be appealing to work at a slow, 
poorly organizedplace intheshortterm,itisalwaysbetter to worksomewhereyouareproudof. Our 
industry is service,so a great service business gives great service,so I want us all to give great service. 

I feel tension on how much to speak on these sorts of topics. I could elaborate on each endlesslyandwhileI mightbemorenuancedandclear,I ammore likely to overwhelmyou. IfI only includebullet 
points,I may missallofthedetailofwhat I amtryingto convey. Second,I do notmeanto comeacrossas 
some sort of expert in this feld. I am just trying my best to keep learning and passing that learning on to 
eachemployee inhopesofmakingthingssimpler,easier andbetter. Pleasefeelfreeto askfor clarifcation 
and elaboration on any of these topics. 

GOOD SERVICE IS FREE 
Many cultures are known for great service (Japan for example).Other places are known for terrible 
service (dive bars).What sets them apart?Think of a time you had great service.... 
How was the person dressed?Was the store clean and organized?Were they stressed? Did they do 
anything in particular?What specifcally did they say? Did what they did seem exhausting or unrealistic? 

Somepeoplesay thatyoucanhavethingsfast,goodor cheap,butonly two. But I feellikeserviceisabit 
of an exception. Service that is good and fast does not really cost a whole lot extra than giving okay 
service because any up front effort is made up on the back end.Doing service well is actually less 
exhausting than trying to function in some sort of compromise because you don't have to clean up 
mistakes and problems later. 

WEARE HERE SOLELY TO GIVE EXCELLENT SERVICE 

Once a guest arrives we should be here and present to serve them.The two reasons that may 
have to wait are 1) there is a line and 2) we are preparing someone else's order.Once they are at the 
front of the line there is no point to rush or cut corners. Getting them taken care is the only objective. 
Once they order please take extra special care to get them their silverware and all the pieces of the 
order. Tell them where to wait for drinks and where to wait for their food. Rushing or forgetting 
something really makes no sense if the objective is to serve this guest. Forgetting silverware or their 
pastry or getting the for here/ to go wrong just makes no sense if we are trying to help this person have 
a great experience. 

Assume we will be busy 

– 
The business model is based on each person working to have a queue basically all the time. If 
you just assume that there should be some people in line,some drinks to make and some 
food tickets up always,the whole idea of it isn't as stressful. 
– 
Thebusinessfunctionsbestwhenthisisthecase. Someone isready to taketheorder,ready 
to makethedrink,ready to maketheir food. Itisactually whenweareslow thatsomeone 
becomes preoccupied with another task and we can't function as well. 
– 
If2000 peoplecameatonceallready to order,thisisno problem. Wehelpeachguestget 
exactly what they order,make their food and drink and serve it to them. 
Work with a sense of perceived urgency 

– 
If there is only one customer in the store,they should get the same experience as when the 
line is 100 people long.We should be prompt and effcient with only one guest and cut no 

corners when the line is long. 

– 
The urgency is only perceived.Moving quickly is not the same as frantic.It should never be 
hectic or frantic. When there is one guest in line we are completely ready to help them and 
get them on their way,when the line is 100 people long,we are as calm as with one person. 
– 
Keep calm because there is no beneft to panic or haste. The sudden burst of customers is no 
surprise. Wesaw itcoming.Wehopedfor it.Weneed it.Itmakesthe jobmorefun. Coming 
to work only to help no one is not what we are here to do. A latte can not be made any 
faster than a latte can be made. We have already thought through the best way to do this and 
that is what we are in the process of doing.With no queue of tickets we would behave the 
same. With 100 tickets we would behave the same. 
ASSUMETHINGSWILL GOWRONG 

Ifno problemswereexpected,robotscouldliterally do the job. 9 timesoutof10,that is 
probably true. Itistheseoddscases,diffcultcustomers,uniquesituationsthatmakehumanservicewhat 
itis. Ifweexpectto accommodatetheproblemsasthey arise,they don'tseem likeproblemsasmuchas 
part of what is to be expected. 

BEANADVOCATE FORTHE BRAND 

Whether you agree with it or not in real life,you are the face of the Smith Brand. There are 
times when things are not running in the ideal fashion,but I still have to defend them as ours.Things are in 
a constant state of fux and hopefully improvement. For the improvement to take place things have to 
change and sometimes that can negatively affect customers or employees while things grow. We need to 
know that for better or worse we are speaking not for ourselves but from the identity of Smith. 

WHY WE SELLWHATWE SELL 
I want to explain how we settle on our menus and why they change and how to explain the changes to 
our customers. 

1. We have limited space. 
1. All restaurants face this problem. We can not serve everything so we have to make decisions 
about what to keep. If we want to add a seasonal item it means we will likely have to cut 
another to have the storage and prep space. We do not have the means and space to have all 
of our existing products,make cold brew,and soup as an example. 
2. We want to change our menu seasonally. 
1. Seasonaldrinks likepumpkinlattesandpeppermintmochasarefun.Itdoesnotmakesenseto 
offer these year round. 
3. We want to serve high quality products 
1. Ingredients that perform well year round are just not as good as seasonally fresh items.When 
our tomatoes stop tasting as good,we feel we need to reconsider our BLT. 
4. We want to fnd new hit items and get new customers 
1. We likeour regularsmorethananybody,butweneedto fndnew waysto engageandexcite 
new customers. One way to do this is to create new menu items. For our business to stay in 
business we feel a constant need to change and adapt. 
WHATWE NEED FROM OUR STAFF 

1. We need you to expect change.
1. Our menu,processes,andpolicieswillchange. Withoutnear constanttweaksand 
improvements,the business will die.I would come to work assuming something has 
changed 

2. We need your support
1. Sometimes the decisions to change a menu is a hard one and sometimes it takes a lot 
of hard work to create something we are proud of.Please know that we are trying 
our best to create the menu we think everyone will love. 
3. We need you to get our customers excited
1. How news is delivered can make all the difference.When people ask why we changed 
something,it was because we are excited about these new menu options,not because 
we are out of touch or trying to ruin their day. 
2. If someone comes in for something we don't have whether it is an old product or a 
product we don't serve,always suggest an alternative and explain why we changed the 
menu if possible. 
4. Give us feedback 
1. We want to know what customers want and what isn't working. Sometimes a 
solution is not possible,but if we are missing an opportunity we want to know about 
it. 
POLICIES ON FOOD,BEVERAGES &TAKING BREAKS 

1. You can have a maximum of one drink per person including water out. 
2. Personal items should not be visible to customers. 
3. Only one person can take a break to eat at a time. 
4. The lineshouldbeclear,thestoreshouldbewellkeptandthedishesshouldbecaughtupbefore 
anyone takes a break. 
5. Foodneedsto beeatenatatable,not inthekitchenandnotbehindthecounter.Thehealth 
department does not allow it. 
HOWTO MAKETHISWORK FOR EVERYBODY 

1. Planahead. Assume itwillbebusy fromaround9-12 eachandevery day.Pleasetakecareof 
some personal stuff before that time or after. 
2. Come to work expecting to be busy. 
3. Wewantyouto feeltakencareof.Pleasehelpcommunicatewhatyouneedso wecanhelpyou 
get what you need. 
4. Whentakingabreak,pleaseplan inmakingsurethestore iscaughtupbeforehand. By making 
sure the store is in top condition.The store can more easily function while you are away. 
5. The fact is that there is enough people here and enough downtime to easily give all of us time 
for our personal needs,but it does need to make sure the needs of the business are met and it 
will take some planning to function well.By planning and working together we can function better. 
Examples 
You want to eat:Get the store caught up,make sure the line is gone,arrange to eat and sit down and eat. 

You have to go to the bathroom:Make sure the store is caught up,tell someone where you are going,and 
go to the bathroom. 

Personal emergency: You are hurt,sick,family emergency,so on.Tell someone where you are going and 
get yourself taken care of 


WEEKEND SERVICE 

While weekend service should not be a ton different than weekday service,we should expect it 
to be busy.If weekdays are rehearsal,the weekend is the performance. We should all come and plan on 
doing the task at hand and getting on with our day. We know that we will be busy and potentiallystressful,but it is really the same each week.By setting up systems we can do the work more easily,see 
problems more early,and then correct problems over the next week for revision. 

Imagine you are having surgery and on the operating table and something goes wrong:Do you 
want everyone to inexplicably switch roles? Do you want someone to say,'hey I have an idea?' Probably 
not. You want them to have a plan for every contingency 

POSITIONS 
Register – rings up the customers 

Barista-Makes the drinks 

Kitchen-Makes the food.They should not run the food if there is support positions scheduled 

Kitchensupport-Runsfood,getscustomersadditionalthings,putsoutfres 

BaristaSupport-Helpkeepdrinkscaughtup,helpsgetcoffees,pastriesandbreadsfor register,clears 
tables if necessary 

Ifsomeonefallsoutoftheir position,they mustbeputback. Wecannotswitchpositionsandswitch 
back.If there is a problem,it is only with the structure and staffng.If something is wrong with the 
structure,we can easily fx it for next week. 


Why do Great Service? 

1. Great service is all that sets us apart. 
It is my honest belief that we are serving a superior product to our competition,but whether or 
not I am right,there are hundreds of places within 20 miles that have coffee,pastry,food,place to 
meet,freewifor whatever theguestmay beafter. Many placesarecheaper,closer,more 
convenient and we just can't compete. Great service sets us apart. 

2. Great service is great marketing. 
People talk about great service.If we market via a newspaper,word of mouth,instagram or 
facebook doesn't it only make sense to give great service once they arrive?The more we impress 
our guests the less we need to invest in marketing. 

3. It makes for a better place to work,attracts better coworkers,and is easier. 
Working for a place that is great is simply better than a place that isn't. The better we treat guest 
collectively the less we will have to settle unruly customers or be in a diffcult situation. When it 
comes times to hire someone,people who want to be like us will want to work for us.Doing 
great service means less messes to clean up and problems to handle 
4. It is simply the right thing to do. 
On a more moral or spiritual note,great service is just the right thing to do.Advocating for 
mediocracy or anything less than great is foolish so we might as well embrace what great service 
may be. 
Why Great Service is Hard 

1. It is unfamiliar. 
Service is not taught in schools or anywhere really. Many times great service is given or received 
more so by fortunate coincidence than by intention. There are few places to 'learn' great service 
and it is even hard to know it when you see it. 

2. It requires more work in the moment. 
Great service is defnitely a case where you are doing more up front work for less problems on 
the back end and this can be unintuitive. If your brain is nagging at you,“should I ask a follow up 
question?” “Should I clarify that?”“Is there something wrong here?”,while it is easier to ignore 
these thoughts,it is usually better service and smarter to ask the question and resolve the issue in 
the moment. 

3. It is not revered. 
Something inAmerican society treats service as something that people should graduate beyond. 
This is confusing because great service applies to working with coworkers,and most future 
careers. There is this idea that someday you get to stop working with people and this just isn't 
true. Sincegreatserviceisso rare,wemightaswellgetgoodat itandbeexceptional. Further, 
being a service expert should be revered because everyone wants to receive it when they are 
out regardless of class and career. 

4. It isn't fair. 
People like things to be fair,and service is simply an asymmetrical transaction and this makes it 


diffcult for both the server and the served. Simply acknowledging this unevenness makes it easier 
to see that,yes the server should be doing more work.Customers will say not to bother or it may 
feel like they are not being fair but that is just the nature of the beast. 

How to help customers 

1. Find out what the customer wants 
2. Get itfor themaccurately,politely andenthusiastically. 
3. Go an extra mile 
1.Find out what the customer wants 

• 
When this is simple it is just being present to take their order. As complexities arise it 
involves explaining the menu to them,where to fnd stuff and educating them about our 
products.Sometimes people don't actually know what they want and you have to workwith them to fnd out that what they are asking for is different than what they want. 
2.Get it for them 

• 
Accurately:Checking and reading back what they ordered will save many headaches down 
the line. Ifthere issomethingunclear,pleaseaskaclarifyingquestion. 
• 
Politely: Usepleaseandthank,eyecontactandasmile.Anythingabrasiveor unkind 
defeats the point of great service 
• 
Enthusiastically: A tiny bit of enthusiasm goes a long way. Acting excited is important. It 
should be noted that this is in fact acting. You are not actually excited. People are here for 
alittlebitofashow atthat isokay. Ifwearecompletely honest,wemay notwantto be 
here at all,but the customer doesn't get to see that.
3.Go the extra mile 

• 
This is where good becomes great. Do whatever you think to go the extra mile. Offer to 
deliver a drink,sample the coffee,explain something about our business or ask about the 
customer's day. Can you do this with every interaction? Probably not. Can you do one 
more than yesterday? Probably.Also,you don't need to go 100 extra miles,just a little 
something more will go a long way. 
• 
A quick note on sampling:Everyone loves sampling,but it needs to be economic and not 
abused. Some things like bakery are just too limited and too expensive to sample. Here 
are 2 rules of thumb: 
1.We can sample things that are infnite.Coffee of the day,iced tea and so on.We can not 
sample things that are fnite.Croissants,bakery,sandwiches 
2.Givesamplesto loyalcustomerswhere itmay turn into anew favorite. Do notgive 
samples to people looking for a 'free snack.' Samples should be offered and not asked for. 
Example:Regular customer comes in who usually gets a latte..“Hey,have you tried our 
new seasonal beverage,if you don't like it I will make you something else!” 
10-4Rule 

This is a good policy for knowing approximately when to greet and engage with people. 
10 Make eye contact with anyone that comes within 10 feet of you. In our store this is basicallyanyone who comes through the door.When you walk the store you can make eye contact with 
people too see that they are okay. 

4 Verbally greet anyone who comes within 4 feet of you. In our store this would be anyone who 


approaches the counter. You probably don't need to say hi to everyone as you deliver a food,but 

if you are face to face with someone it never hurts to say “hi!” 

How to Handle Complaints 

I want to empower each and every single staff member to be able to engage with a customer 
complaint and try to resolve it in the moment. Sometimes needing to get a manager can make the 
matter worse. Ontheother hand,sometimesguestsdo better withafreshface. Ifyouever get inthe 
weeds asking the guest to hold on while you get someone else to do this exact process can make all the 
difference. 

Here is the process with elaboration below: 

1. Acknowledge the complaint. 
2. Sincerely apologize 
3. Make things right 
4. Thank the customer 
5. Write it down. 
1. Acknowledge the complaint. 
◦ 
Start by simply letting the guest know you understand the issue.Usually this involves 
saying okay or I understand. 
◦ 
It is usually not a good idea to explain why unless they start asking why. The reason 
for this is that you may end up frustrating them more than needed. 
2. Sincerely apologize 
◦ 
Quickly jump to saying that you are sorry.It is important that they know that you 
prefer that they not be disappointed. 
3. Make things right 
◦ 
Find out what it may take to make things right. You will usually fnd out that it isn't as 
muchasyouthoughtnecessary. Inour business,offeringto remakeadrinkor replace 
an item is all it takes.As a policy,I prefer not to give cash refunds,but sometimes this is 
the only logical way forward. A gift card is also an option is someone has been treated 
wrong in some way. 
◦ 
You may fnd out that you need to keep repeating steps 1 & 2 before they are ready 
to make things right. This is a good time to point out this is not a robotic checklist but 
more of a blueprint or road map. Maybe the customer goes straight to asking for what 
they want and you need to jump straight on to step 3. 
4. Thank the customer 
◦ 
When the customer knows that we appreciate the feedback it can make all the 
difference. Simply thank them for taking to time to work this out. 
5. Write it down. 
◦ 
Do not do this in the moment. Within 24 hours of an incident,please let us know in 
writing what transpired and what the resolution was. This is important for 2 reasons: 
1. If we have a consistent issue that needs to be addressed at a bigger level. 
Example:The chai has been returned 5 times today. 
2. We have an employee who needs more resources for handling issues 
when the arise. 
Example:Tony has handed out gift cards to someone each shift he works! 

HOSPITALITY PRINCIPLES 

• 
Principle 1:We need atleast1person facingtowards the customer ready to 
help100% of the time. 
◦ 
It is super essential that our customers feel hosted 100% of the time. This does not mean 
that they do not have to wait to be helped,but it does mean that someone has to be 
present helping the guest at the front of the line all of the time. 
◦ 
It is very common for one worker to leave to handle some sort of side task and then for 
another co worker to also leave and handle some other side task and therefore have no 
one to help a guest that shows up. Often guests will not approach the counter if there is 
no one to approach so they just walk on by and do not get helped. The key to success is 
communication. Tell your coworker where you are going or how long you will be gone. If 
a customer is waiting and they can't fgure out what they are waiting for,explain that you 
have to slice a couple loaves or whatever and will be right back. It is not waiting that is the 
issue. It is waiting without knowing. 
◦ 
If your coworker is behind the counter,but busy making drinks,this does not count as 
present to help guests and therefore it is not a good time to run and do something else.If 
you need to do something,get them caught up on whatever they are working on before 
taking on the next task. This is why there should only be one side task going on at a time. 
There is plenty of time if we are well organized to get the house cleaned and stocked and 
so on. 
◦ 
If you are working on a side task or chatting or doing whatever and a guest approaches 
the counter,we must stop what we are doing immediately and help them. When a guest 
approaches,we should greet them and say hi before they say hi to us. 
• 
Principle 2:Closing mustwait until after we close 
◦ 
The time we 'close' is actually only the time we start our closing procedure. We can still 
get a customer squared away with a to go item or some beans or whatever. We can 
serve guests at least 10 mins after close and even longer if it is reasonable. Guests can 
order a glass of wine at close and stay up to 1 hour later. Then we can politely ask them 
to leave.We are also open before the stated opening time. As soon as coffee can be 
served,we can take guests.We are usually ready to go 10-15mins before the actual 
opening time. 
◦ 
We need to present ourselves as fully open until we close. Sweeping and mopping or 
rolling up the mats makes us look focused more so on the close than on the customer. If 
you have nothing to do,you can do extra side work or extra deep cleaning while one 
person manages the guests so we still appear to be fully operational. 
• 
Principle 3:Keepthe tables clean and chairs neatly tuckedin 
◦ 
When our guests leave the counter,they do not leave our business. When they go sit 
down,we should try to maintain a neat and tidy customer space. We should try to check 
the space at least 2 times an hour and after any large amount of people leave. 
◦ 
To remain in accordance with principle 1,we must make sure there is no line and that at 
least 1 worker remains present to help guests. 
• 
Principle 4:Play appropriate musicat an appropriate volume 
◦ 
Since we have a record player,we are presenting ourselves a bit as Djs and therefore 
should have good and fun music playing. This means that when the record ends we should 

fip it over or put on the iPad. 

◦ 
Good music is subjective,but we should be playing for the customer,not for ourselves. 
What sounds good at 5pm may not be so appropriate at 7:30am. ACDC is one of my 
favorite bands but they really don't have much of a place in a coffee shop. Look around 
and try to meet the guests personal expectations. 
◦ 
Please take care of the record needle and the related equipment.It is fragile and 
expensive. 
• 
Principle 5:Always getthe customer satisfed 
◦ 
Some people say the customer is always right,and some people think customers are jerks 
who don'tknow anything. Our versionofthisis“Alwaysgetthecustomer satisfed.” This 
meansthatwhether they gotthedrinkorder wrongor thatwedid,weshouldjustfx it. If 
we see someone who seems unsatisfed,we should ask and make sure we got everything 
thatthey wanted. Who careswhosefaultitis.Lets justget itrightandgetonwithour 
lives. After yearsofdwellingonhardcustomers,theeasiestway to handlethem isto take 
them head on,get them satisfed and not worry about it too much. 
◦ 
If we got it wrong,just make it right! If someone orders something iced,but gets it hot,just 
remake it.Or if they wanted a large instead of a small,just make it happen.We want to get 
these people happy! 
◦ 
Over explain everything.Tell each customer where to wait and what the next step is. By 
over explaining,we can avoid a lot of sticky situations down the line.If they order a 
pourover,tell them it will be 4-5 minutes.Tell them drinks will be served at the counter 
and food will be delivered to their table. 
◦ 
Take an extra second to make sure they have been charged accurately and that they got 
their number,silverware etc...Rather than have to correct something down the line,it onlymakes sense to get the details right the frst time. 
◦ 
There are a very few 'exceptions' to this rule. 
▪ 
1.Peopledo haveto pay for whatthey get. Ifsomeonewantscoffeefor cheaper or 
wants to add bacon for no extra cost,we can not change the prices for them. 
▪ 
2.People who are abusing you or harassing you. This does not mean you have to be 
mean to them,just that you do not have to agree to their requests.If you feel like the 
tension is rising,get someone else to help you right away. 
▪ 
3.If someone wants something we don't have (Soy milk,baguettes,cheesecake,gluten 
free,etc) please suggest alternatives that we do have or explain how we can get these 
things rather than just say no. 
• 
Principle 6:Keepthe counters clean and organized 
◦ 
It is a sure sign of a professional business when the counter area is neat,organized and 
clean. Our counter hasavery bigtendency to getdirty,messy anddisorganized. 
◦ 
When you spill liquid,wipe it up.When you spill coffee grounds,sweep them up.The 
counter should remain clean and dry. 
◦ 
Rags need to stay folded and out of sight.There should never be a balled up rag on the 
counter. 
◦ 
Keep everything in its right place.The is no need for scales and syrup bottles to drift 
across the counter. 
◦ 
Tickets are to help you serve guests and make sure the guest gets the correct drink,they 
should not be tucked under scales and syrup bottles.Just set the ticket or two that you 
are working on in front of the espresso machine 

• 
Principle 7:Win guests into regulars 
◦ 
This is really about being in-store marketers. We want to market ourselves in our best 
light to all our guests each time they come in. Instagram and facebook show us in our 
best light but those viewers are just hopes of real customers. If we use Facebook and 
Instragramto getguests inour door,wewanttherealthingto beas inspiring. Itissilly to 
invest in advertising if we do not intend to please the guests when they show up for real. 
◦ 
We want people to feel welcome and at home and well taken care for. The two main 
critiques of coffee shop service is that the baristas appear either uninterested or 
pretentious.We do not want to appear this way. 
• 
Principle 8:WorkWell withyour Co-workers 
◦ 
Say hello when you arrive. 
◦ 
Treatallyour coworkerspolitely,andrespectfully. Ifyouhaveabasic critique,just letthem 
know in a way that you would want to hear it rather than get frustrated with them. If 
there isahardto resolvematter,pleasenotify amanager atanappropriatetime. Email 
works well for these types of issues. 
◦ 
Over communicate what you need or want.If you need to go somewhere or get help 
with something,ask clearly and politely. 
◦ 
The hand-off: When your shift ends,pass on the following info to next employee.When 
you come in to work,please ask the following questions. 
▪ 
1.What we are out of 
▪ 
2.What is new 
▪ 
3.Any open tabs or unresolved matters 
◦ 
Cross training,Playing your position and Playing Zone 
▪ 
If you are only trained in one position,stay there and own it. 
▪ 
Once you have learned multiple positions,your scheduled position is your main 
responsibility,but you can swing into other positions to assist and speed up a 
coworker particularly when they are backed up.This will allow us to be more effcient 
by “doubleteaming”apositionto knockouta lineor abottleneck. Just like insports, 
it is important to make sure you're not abandoning your main position. 
▪ 
When you are being assisted it is important to communicate how your coworker can 
best help you to prevent them from guessing and guessing wrong. 
◦ 
Can you get that tea for me? 
◦ 
Will you run this for me? 
◦ 
I need more vanilla syrup 
• 
PRINCIPLE 9: DON'T SAY NO 
◦ 
Customers are going to ask for things we don't sell or we can't do all the time.When this 
happens,try to turn the experience or issue into a positive one! when someone orders a 
white mocha or breakfast burrito,do not say,"we don't have that." Instead suggest an 
alternative! "these are our housemade syrups,you can add any to a latte!" "a lot of 
customers really like the caramel!" "we have really good breakfast sandwiches!"This may 
not work 100% of the time,but I know we can turn people on to what we do well,what 
we think tastes good or something they may like even better than what they wanted! 
Please avoid saying,“I have never tried that”“i don't know if it is good”or“i don't drink 
tea” 

• 
PRINCIPLE 10:HANDLINGCUPS 
◦ 
Whenhandlingglassware,pleaseavoidtouchingtherimarea. For coffeemugs,itisbestto 
hold drinks by the handle or by the saucer. Please do not stick your hand inside of any 
cups. Ifitisaglassor to go cup,pleaseonly holdthedrinkby thebottom½ ofthecup. 

FOOD SAFETY 

In addition to great service,we absolutely must provide all food and beverages in a manner that is 
clean,safe and healthful to all our guests. The food industry is regulated just the same and medicine and 
pharmaceuticals by the FDA.The Hennepin County Department of Health inspects our cafe annuallyunannounced. We must take care to operate in a healthy and safe manner to avoid being shut down but 
more importantly to give each and every guest a clean safe and healthy experience.This guide will teach 
you the basics of working with food and beverage in a healthful way. 

DRESS CODE 
In addition to our cafe dress code policy,the health department requires all employees follow 
these policies for attire. 

– 
Your hair must either be short or pull back into a pony tail. 
– 
Your hands and wrists should be free of excessive jewelry. 
– 
You fnger nails should not have chipped nail polish. 
– 
You must wear closed toes shoes.No sandals or fip fops. 
WASHING HANDS 

When you arrive,you should wash your hands with warm soapy water for more than 15 seconds 
and dry them with a paper towel. You should wash your hands each time you handle something soiled 
such as changing after changing garbages. 

RAGS 

Rags are only allowed in a bucket completely covered by fresh sanitizing solution.Rags should 
never be out on the counter.Making coffee and the health department do not align super well,so when 
the health dept is present,there can only be 2 rags present and both must be fully covered in sanitizer. 
The health department does not allow us to dry out the portaflter between uses,so when they are 
here,this rag must disappear. 

ONTHE COUNTERS 

There should not be any personal items on the counters.Chipotle had a serious negative media 
issues a few years ago and one issues included cell phones being on the counters.Please keep your 
personal items in you pockets.If you bring food,you should store it on the employee food shelf in the 
kitchenfridge. Ifyouhaveadrink,youshouldonly haveoneandstore itoutofcustomerssight.Please 
limit personal items that are out on the shelves to one item.If you have more personal items,please store 
them in the offce. 

TEMPSAND DATES 

Each product we serve should have a label with the products name and the date it was made or 
opened. Asarule,theseproductsaregoodfor 7 days. Everythingperishableshouldstored infridgesand 
kept below 42 degrees.Please do not leave milk or other products on the counter. 

FIFO (frst in – frst out) 
When using products such as milk,make sure to serve the oldest product frst.When stocking inventory, 
please stock the new product behind the older product so it is natural for the oldest product to be 
grabbed frst. 


PUTTINGAWAY ORDERS 

Since product can not be left out at room temp,we must all work together to put away orders 
ASAP.Please check off each product to make sure we got the correct quantity,and help put away the 
orders right as they come in. 

DEEP CLEANING 

We have yet to have a health inspection without some aspect of the store found to be unclean. 
The store can not be too clean. Keeping your area neat and tidy is part of your job. However that is not 
enough to keep the store adequately clean. Deep cleaning all parts of the store in also part of the job for 
allpositions. Wipingoutcoolers,cleaningunder countersandcleaningtheentirehouseaswellaspatio 
and yard all need to be revisited daily. A little work each day will go a long way. 


SERVINGALCOHOL 

Serving alcohol is regulated by the government under theATF department. The city of Eden 
Prairie issued us a permit to sell on-sale beer and wine. This means that we can sell non hard liquor to 
guests to consume while they are customers at our store. We are not allowed to sell wine or beer to go 
with one notable exception covered later. 

IT ISYOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE SURE OUR CUSTOMERSARE OVER 21 

When a guest orders beer or wine they must be over 21 years old. The police will annually 
perform an undercover operation where they send in someone who is not 21 to try and buy alcohol. If 
you serve them,there will be a fne for the business,but it is also a real criminal offense for yourself. You 
willbechargedandarrested. Inshort,youmustmakesurethateachguest isover 21.Thisisrelatively 
easy.You must ask for their ID and check their age! 

THE SERVER IS RESPONSIBLE 
Ifyour coworker ringsupaguest,butyouserve it,youareresponsible. For thisreason,youmay 
also ask for their ID if you have any uncertainty. 

YOU MUST BE 18 TO SERVEALCOHOL 
If you are under 18,you can not ring up guests,pour beer or wine or serve it. You can clear empty 
glassware from tables and wash the dishes. 

OPENWINE BOTTLES 
If a guest orders a bottle of wine and they do not fnish it,they can cork the bottle and take the rest 
home in a paper bag. This concept is so rare as to nearly not be worth mentioning but for some reason 
people like to know if and how they can and can't do certain things. This is the one way they can leave 
with alcohol. 


SCHEDULING POLICIES 

One of the perks of the coffee shop industry is the ability to have a fexible schedule that 
allowsfor another job,hobby or education. Sinceweareopen longhourswecanfndshiftsfor 
almost any part time situation. With a small close knit team we can work together to allow each 
person their hobbies,trips,etc. The inverse is that a small team has to come to work each week 
to fll the shifts particularly during more heavily staffed weekends. Weekday shifts that only have 2 
people working are important as well since if one person is gone there is only one person to 
work. Eachshiftofeachday iscriticalto thebusiness,so weneedeachworker to workalltheir 
scheduled shifts. 

AVAILABILITY 

Your availability is your commitment to when and how much you can work each week. If 
your availability sheet says you are available we are going to assume you can work. If your weekly 
availability needs to change you must fll out a revised form and we must discuss how it will ft in 
with the rest of the team to make sure the business and other staff can be accommodated. 

Example:Joe was hired on thebasisof beingable to open Saturdays and closeTuesdays. He is 
changing his school schedule and can no longer closeTuesdays and now wants to open on Tuesdays. 
Tony and Heather have been opening on Tuesdays and want to continue to do so.Joe may not be able 
to switch toTuesday opens. 

ASKING OFF 

You need to ask off if you are not available during your usual availability.This is for trips and 
special events. We need to receive requests for time off 1 month in advance. They need to be 
submitted in writing in email format. As a general rule we can accommodate about 5 days off per 
quarter or 1-2 days per month. We can also only reasonably allow 1-2 people to ask off for the 
same day.

We want each person to go on trips,concerts,parties,school fnals etc...but there just 
isn't a bottomless bench to pull in from when people are out of town. If you have more than 
average requests we need to discuss whether it is a possibility. If you have a longer trip in one 
month,you may have to limit your vacation time in the next few months. 

Example:It islate June andJoe wants to go to Houston to see his new born nephew. He is also 
planning on goingto his wife's cabin over theJuly 4th weekend. Each trip is 5dayslong.Joe needs to 
give a month notice for the Houston trip and can not take 10 days off in a short period without putting 
excessive stress on the business.If 12 employees were to all take off 10 days that would result in 120 
days off. Since Joe in unavailable over july 4th weekend,other employees didnotgetto go out of town 
that weekend. 

Potentialsolutions includeskippingor changingthetimingof onetrip,workingextrabeforeand 
after and avoiding other trips the rest of the year or shortening both trips. 

FINDINGA SUB 

If the schedule is posted and you want to not work during your scheduled shift,you must 
fnd your own substitution. Asking for a sub can put your coworkers in a stressful situation if they 
feel excessive pressure to cover for you.For this reason you must ask a manager frst who you 
allowedto reachoutto. Ifyoucannotfndasub,youmustcometo work. Your submustftthe 


following criteria: 

– 
They must be able to do the job. 
– 
They can not be working more than 8 hours or more than 6 days that week. 
– 
The sub must be approved by a manager. 
Example:Joe gottickets to theViking's game againstthePackers at12:00 on Sunday. He is scheduled 
until2:00PM.He is the openingbarista for abusy shift. He must askthe manager whohe can askto 
work as a sub. The manager may note that this is the 3rd time this month that Joe has begged for a 
sub this month. 

CALLING IN SICK 

Calling insickisreservedfor furelatedsymptoms(Vomiting,diarrhea,highfever). Ifyou 
haveacoldor sinus infection,youarestillexpectedto come in. Hangoversdo notcountasbeing 
sick. If you can fnd a sub that is okay.You must notify a manager as soon as possible once the fu 
like conditions set in so we can work together to fnd a sub.Once your have recovered for 24 
hours you can work again. 

Example:Joe wakes up in the middle of thenight with thefu. He texts the manager who receives the 
text and 5:45AM and works on fnding a sub with Joe. Joe also texts a coworker who he thinks can 
work for him which the manager approves. That coworker ends up working Joe's shift. 

NO CALL NO SHOW 

Each employee's attendance is critical. A no call / no show shift is when you do not come 
to a shift without a sub or prior explanation. We have zero tolerance for this behavior. If you are 
running late,please notify the manager so we know there is no need to start looking for you. 

Example:Joe didn'tknow hewas opening. We callandtrackhim down andheis 1hour late. If this 

happens again,he may lose his employment.If he didn't know he was opening because of a sub,then 

the originally scheduled person will be held liable. 


ADDITIONAL POLICIES 
HOWTO EXPLAINTHE NAME CHANGES 

We have changed our name a few times over the years,and some people will want a more thorough 
explanation. Wewillhaveconfusedcustomersaboutthenamechanges,somestillthinkthey areata 
Dunn Bros.The best way to handle these questions is to stick to the positive.Rather than dwell on what 
didn't work,focus on what works well.We have been in business and stayed in business for 12 years.We 
have in house roasted coffee,Rustica and Sunrise pastries delivered daily as well as breakfast and lunch 
menus and wine,beer and ice cream.If you had to sum it up in one sentence,it would be“On May 1st we 
rebranded as Smith to best serve our customers.”It is a little corny just like that so feel free to fnd your 
own words. 

RUSTICA GIFT CARDS 
Since our customers may have purchased a Rustica gift card in our store,we want to honor them,but our 
technology doesn'tacceptthem. I haveaprinted listofeachgiftcardbalance.Ifacustomer comes in 
with a Rustica gift card,please offer to transfer it to a Smith gift card,look up the balance and transfer it 
over. Please put the old gift card in the till so we can track what % are transferred over. 

MEETING ROOMS 
We have 5 spaces that can be reserved by flling out a form on our website at 
www.smith1877.com/meetings.There is usually no fee to reserve the space for 2 hours and each 
additional hour costs $20.Larger groups can reserve the whole store after hours our during the week. 
For larger events,there is also an online form guests can fll out for details relating to that. 

Ifsomeonewantsto reservearoomfor thesameday,simply checkthescheduleandmakesurewe are 
not 'kicking anyone out' ad try to get them squared away. 

COMMUNICATIONS 
We will have numerous updates,additional training and other information that we will need to 
communicate to you for everyone to work here harmoniously.Please understand that any emails that we 
send through our staff newsletter are required to be read and understood.We will text or write notes as 
needed as well.We will have staff meetings on occasion as well.Checking email,texts etc is a required 
part of your job here. 

WEEKENDAVAILABILITY 

We require weekend availability for each employee who works here. There are 14 weekend shifts 
to fll and at any given time 10-15 employees.This means that each person needs to work ~1 weekend 
shift each week assuming we have 14+ on staff and no one is out of town (rarely the case). With about 
30 week day shifts,employees who can not work on a weekend may not be able to get scheduled for 
week day shifts.It may not be fair to expect one employee to work Saturday and Sunday while another 
gets to only work Monday-Friday. 

BREAKS 

State law states:State law requires employers to provide employees with restroom time and 
suffcient time to eat a meal.If the break is less than 20 minutes in duration,it must be counted as hours 
worked.Time to use the nearest restroom must be provided within each four consecutive hours of work. 
Meal time must be provided to employees who work eight or more consecutive hours. The employer 
can set the hours an employee works,including when a meal or rest break can be taken.For the time to 


be unpaid,the employee has to be completely relieved of duties for at least 20 minutes 

Shiftsrange inlengthfrom3 – 8 hours. Ifyouhaveto usethebathroom,pleasewaitfor thereto 
be no line and for all orders to be complete and simply let a coworker know where you are going. If you 
need a break to eat,please wait for a slow time,and sit at a table and eat your meal.If we ever schedule 
you 8+ hours we will allow you time for a 20 minute break. 

PAY CHECKS 

Our payroll is processed through Square.When you are hired,you will get an online account to 
add your name,address,social security number etc.You can also fll in your federal and state tax 
withholdings. There are 2 pay periods each month(1st -15th and 16th -month end). Pay checks will be 
ready for pickup within 5 days of the pay period (by the 20th and 5th of each month).Checks are in 
envelopes in a drawer behind the counter. 

TIPS 
Cash and credit card tips are collected and totaled throughout the pay period and distributed to 
all service positions on an hourly basis.They are added to your total pay and included in your check. 

HARRASMENT 

We have entered an era where we have all become responsible to handle complex issues of 
harassmentanddiscriminationinanethical,thoughtfulandfair way. Againandagain,coffeeshop 
employees,managers and restaurant workers are sprung into national and international coverage over a 
misstepregardingsex,race,religionandother mattersrelatingto harassmentor discrimination. Itis 
important for us to know that you are supported and this behavior need not be tolerated from 
customers,coworkers,vendors or others. 

It seems that most of the publicized issues relate to someone in over their head reacting in a way 
that is later deemed by the public to be wrong. Our advice is if you fnd yourself in an unsafe situation to 
please calmly and quickly excuse yourself from the situation and have someone else help the guest and 
quickly report the issue to a manager or owner. If you fnd the situation too unsafe for this approach do 
not hesitate to call 911 for police to intervene. 

Some examples of phrases that may be helpful are:“I am sorry but I can not help you.I am going 
to fnd someone else to help you”or“I have to excuse myself,someone will be with you shortly.”This will 
allow us to have someone professionally talk to the person and either stop their inappropriate behavior 
or remove them from the property in a fair way. 

We need each employee to feel safe and respected with each other each and every day.Our 
company and our employees do not discriminate against anyone regardless of race,religion,gender, 
gender preference. 

HISTORY OFTHE PROPERTY AND BUSINESS 

Smith opened on May 1 2018,but we have been in business serving coffee since 2006.Our 
business goal is to welcome the community and serve them the best tasting cafe food and coffee drinks 
in the world.By operating fully independently as Smith we feel we can best serve our community and 
customer base. 

This house was built by Sheldon and Mary Smith in 1877. They had a daughter nameAmie who 
got married and took the last name Douglas.She had a child named Sheldon Douglas.They lived here 
until the 1950's when they sold the house to Earl More.He and his wife lived here until 1992. The 


More's donated the house to the City of Eden Prairie.The house was empty for 10 years.In 2002,Dunn 
Brothers made a deal with the city to turn the property into a coffee shop which they ran until 2006. 
Ann Schuster bought the business and ran it as a Dunn Brothers until 2016.In 2016,we had the 
opportunity to partner with Rustica and become the 2nd Rustica location.After 18 months of successful 
business,we found we could serve the community better with our own independent name. 

Category 
Beverages 

Food,Pastries,Beans 
Retail 

EMPLOYEE DISCOUNT 

While you are working 
You can have one small drink for here 

for free at a time during your shift 
30% off 
Full Price 

While you are not working /To go 
30% off 

30% off 
Full Price 


TOP -DOWN SIDEWORK CHECKLIST 
COMPLETETHIS LIST IN SEQUENTIAL ORDER EACH DAY 
CROSS OFFTHE LISTASYOU GO 
RESET DAILY 
DO NOT GO BACK ONCE DONE FORTHE DAY 
DO NOT START NEXTTASK UNTIL LAST ONE FINISHED 
SHOULB BE STARTEDAFTER MORNING RUSH ~11:00AM 

STOCKTO GO 
BOXES & BAGS 

WEIGH COFFEE 
DOSES 

STOCK 
BEVERAGES 

STOCK PAPER 
PRODUCTS 

EMPTY ALL 
GARBAGES 

ROLL 
SILVERWARE 

CLEAN 
BATHROOMS 

PASTRY BOXES 

FILL HOUSE 
COFFEE CUPS 
ICED COFFEE 

PAPERTOWELS 
&TOILET PAPER 
BATHROOMS 

2 FULL BINS 

LUNCH BOXES 

FILL DARK ROAST 
CUPS 
ICEDTEA 

BEVERAGE & 
PASTRY NEEDS 
OUTSIDE 

EVERGREEN LIST 

LUNCH BAGS TO GO BAGS 
FILL POUROVER 
CUPS 
WINE BEER / SODA 

CUSTOMERAREA BACKOFHOUSE 

THESETASKS CAN BE DONE REPEATEDLY THROUGHOUTTHE DAY 

WIPE DOWN TUCK IN CHAIRS WIPE DOWN WIPE DOWN PUTAWAY 
TABLES COUNTERS FRIDGES CLEAN DISHES 
WASH DISHES FIND 
SOMETHINGTO 
CLEAN & CLEAN 

IT 
ALLTHIS IS DONEANDYOU NEED SOMETHING ELSETO DO? 

FIND SOMETHING DIRTY AND DEEP CLEAN IT! 
MAKE IT LOOK LIKE NEW! 


BLACK OUT SIDEWORK LIST 
This is an additional list of side work and deep cleaning items that needs to be done every so often. 

Here are the rules of the game: 

– 
Please complete one task per day or multiple on slow shifts,early in theAM or later in the 
evening. These are less essential than the daily checklist,but there should be time to do one 
each week day shift. 
– 
Once you complete an item cross it off with the dry erase marker. 
– 
Once the last one is crossed off,start the sheet again. 
– 
If you don't know how to do a task,ask to be taught! 
Sweep Sweep Fireplace Sweep Stained Sweep Stairs Sweep upstairs 
basement Room GlassWindow and Halls conference 
Rooms rooms 
Wipe base Wipe base Wipe base Wipe base Wipe base 
boards main boards boards boards boards 
customer area freplace room stained glass stairs and hall upstairs 
window rooms room conference 
rooms 
Dust window Dust window Dust window Dust window Dust window 
sills and ceilings sills and ceilings sills and ceilings sills and ceilings sills and ceilings 
main customer freplace room stained glass stairs and hall upstairs 
area window rooms room conference 
room list 
Wipe table legs Wipe table legs Wipe table legs Wipe table legs Purocaff 
and chairs main and chairs and chairs and chairs stained pitchers 
customer area freplace room stained glass upstairs 
window room conference 
room 
Wipe glass wine Vacuum fridge Wash tile back Vacuum fridge Wipe down 
shelf coils in kitchen splash coils under each stair with a 
counter damp rag or 
mop 
Windex Windex front Windex sneeze Clean bathroom Wipe coffee and 
bathroom doors door guards foor corners espresso 
brewers 


Closing Checklist 
Revised November 2018 

Please note: 
You Can still accept payments after the till is closed. 
You can still take orders after coffee equipment is cleaned. 
Use your best judgment whether to make a quick latte for to go, 
let someone use the bathroom or to keep the door locked. 

Time Person 1 Person 2 

T+00:00 Bakery CompleteBakery Closing Dishes 1.Clear andwipealltables 
(10 Minutes) procedure(seeattachedpage). (15 minutes) 2.Collectalldishes 
3.Wash all dishes 

T+00:10 Coffee 1.Clear allservicedishesto Putaway 1.Printsalesreport 
(15 minutes) sink drawer 2.Compiletips 
2.Purocaffurns (5 minutes) 3.Takedrawer upstairsadput 
3.Cleanespresso machine insafe 

T + 00:25 Counter 
(5 minutes) 

1.Empty Ice2.Put syrups in fridge 
3.Charge Scales 
4.Turn off Record player 
5.Wipe down counters6.Turn soft machine to stand by 
7.Turn off dipping well 

Clean tables 
(5 minutes) 

1.Notify remaining customers 
2.Wipe down and clear 
remaining tables 
3.Wash remaining dishes,drain 
sinks,turn off faucets 

T + 00:30 Floors 
(15 minutes) 
1.Fill Mop Bucket2.Mope customer area3.Mop Bar4.Mop Kitchen 
Floors 
(15 minutes) 
1.Move all mats to a safe place 
2.Sweep Customer area3.Sweep Bar4.Sweep Kitchen 
T + 00:45 Deep Clean 
(10 Minutes) 
1.Tackle an area that may need 
special attention 
2.Complete daily deep clean 
item (See attached). 
Deep Clean 
(10minutes) 
1.Tackle an area that may need 
special attention 
2.Complete daily deep clean 
item (See attached). 
T+00:55 Lights &
Doors 
1.All doors locked 
2.All windows latched 
Lights &
Doors 
1.All doors locked 
2.All windows latched 
(5 minutes) 3.All Lights off 
4.All Sinks shut off 
(5 minutes) 3.All Lights off 
4.All Sinks shut off 

T + 1:00+ Complete 

the 
essentials 
and Get on 
your way 

1.Wrap up whatever is keeping 
you2.If necessary leave a note 
explaining anything openers 
should know 
3.Discuss w/ manager if task 
seems impossible 

• 
As a general rule:Do not leave one employee alone 

OPENING CHECKLIST 

DRAWER Bring down starting 
drawer 
UNLOCK DOORS Turn on all lights Unlock all doors 
ICE Fill ice bucket 
RAGS Get starting set ofrags and sanitizer 
CONDIMENT BAR Set out fresh cream Make sure condiment 
bar is stocked 
BREW COFFEE Pre heat urns Brew coffees 
TUN ON MUSIC Turn on both amps Adjust volume 
appropriately 
BAKERY Set out bakery Display bakery tags 
Mise en place Make sure you havepaper products andstock for 24 hours of 
service 
PREPARE FOR CUSTOMERS Expect customers upto 15 minutes before 
opening 
ESPRESSO Make sure espresso is 
dialed in and serving 
to spec 
CUSTOMERAREA Make sure all tables 
and chairs are neat 
and clean 
SIDEWORK Take on side work 
until customer begin 
to arrive 


